David Cameron has told Scottish Tory activists that the no campaign.s victory in the independence referendum has created a huge opportunity to win back seats at the general election.

The prime minister told a fringe meeting at the Conservatives. national conference in Birmingham that the party could capitalise on its larger supporter base and growth in political activism during the campaign.

The Tories famously have only one Scottish MP . the junior Scotland Office minister David Mundell . after being wiped out during Tony Blair.s landslide election victory in 1997. The party has since struggled to win back seats in rural heartlands such as Perthshire and cities such as Edinburgh.

Under leader Ruth Davidson, the Scottish party.s polling and electoral results have remained solid at about 17%. Its anti-independence campaign, Conservative Friends of the Union, attracted support and donations from 80,000 people, most of whom were not party members.

.We have a huge political opportunity here,. Cameron said. .We.ve now got a leader with huge stature and following in Scotland. We.ve now got a database of not just Conservative supporters but of friends of the union, who look to us to defend our United Kingdom.

.We.ve got people who.ve been hardened in the battle on the streets and in campaigning, and we.ve got some targets in our sights. We.ve got the people, we.ve got the message, we.ve got the leader, now we can really turn the next 200 days into the opportunity to win more Conservative seats in the Westminster parliament for Scotland..

Cameron revealed that he had watched the referendum results in the press office at Downing Street with his sons, one of whom was wearing tartan pyjamas. He said the no victory, by 55% to 45%, was the .happiest two hours of my year..

It was a relief .going to bed as prime minister of the United Kingdom and waking up as prime minister of the United Kingdom..

In her conference speech on Tuesday, Davidson is expected to say that the battle for centre-left votes between the SNP and Labour will create a political opportunity for the Tories to capture .sensible centre-ground. votes.

.In this referendum campaign we.ve found our voice, and people across Scotland have noticed,. she is expected to say. .The last two years have proved beyond any reasonable doubt that, far from being .toxic., it was the Scottish Conservatives who spoke up and stood up for Scotland.s silent majority. It was us who made the confident, patriotic case for the UK..

The Tories are thought to be targeting seats in Perthshire, held by the SNP culture spokesman, Pete Wishart, where the no vote won by 60% to 40%; north-east Fife . a county where the no vote won 55%; and Angus, where the no vote took 54%.

The Tories are also eyeing Aberdeenshire, a core SNP area where the outgoing SNP leader, Alex Salmond, has his Holyrood seat and the Westminster leader, Angus Robertson, has his constituency, yet which voted decisively against independence by 60% to 40%.

The Tories. biggest challenge will be converting no votes into active backing for them at an election; Scottish voters behave differently at different elections and can favour the SNP because they are seen as champions of Scotland.s interests in the UK.

Despite winning more than 400,000 votes in the 2010 general election and seeing its support grow in last May.s European parliamentary elections at the same time as Ukip support doubled to 10%, the Tories have struggled to win enough constituency-level support in Scotland to take individual seats.

However, Tory activists also believe they have an opportunity to attract centre-right voters after the Scottish government and Yes Scotland ran a strongly centre-left pro-independence campaign.

Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP deputy leader on the brink of succeeding Salmond as party leader and first minister, has been instrumental in that shift in policies and targeting Labour voters in central and urban Scotland.
